introduction.md, before:

# Introduction

(This text **for now** is unchanged from the introduction text in the echopype documentation page)

The decades-long experience from the satellite remote sensing community has shown that a set of robust and well-articulated definitions of "data processing levels" [1]–[5] can lead directly to broad and highly productive use of data. Processing level designations also provide important context for data interpretation [6]. However, no such community agreement exists for active acoustic data. The ambiguity associated with the interoperability and inter-comparability of processed sonar data products has hindered efficient collaboration and integrative use of the rapidly growing data archive across research institutions and agencies.

The `echopype` team is developing a clearly defined progression of data processing levels for active ocean sonar data. The development leverages the collective experience from remote sensing and large-scale, long-term ocean and ecological observatories [7]–[10]. Data processing functions in `echopype` are clearly associated with specific Processing Level inputs and outputs, and when appropriate, will generate a `processing_level` dataset global attribute with entries such as "Level 1A", "Level 2B", "Level 4", etc.

Commit message:

First solid draft is now complete

introduction.md, after:

# Introduction

The increasing deployment of active sonar systems in a wide variety of ocean observing platforms have created unique opportunities for characterizing mid-trophic biological scatterers such as fish and zooplankton in the water column (Benoit-Bird & Lawson, 2016; Ariza et al., 2022). Data generated from these instruments are increasingly recognized for their potential and distinctive contribution to marine ecosystem assessments and resource management, and as a critical component of observing systems for marine life (Benson et al., 2018; Estes Jr. et al, 2021; Satterthwaite et al., 2021; Santora et al, 2021; Schwing, 2022).

The value of archiving and openly distributing the large volume of data collected by scientific echosounders and similar instruments is now widely recognized (Wall et al., 2016; Haris et al., 2021; Ariza et al., 2022). However, maximizing the use of such data entails the use of community data and metadata standards and data catalogs for data discoverability and access (Wall et al., 2016; Benson et al., 2018; Buck et al., 2019). In addition, a consistent categorization of the variety of data sets and data products derived from echosounder data will facilitate access and appropriate use of such data.

The decades-long experience from the satellite remote sensing community has shown that a set of robust and well-articulated definitions of "data processing levels" (Parkinson et al., 2006; Robinson, 2006; Weaver, 2014; NASA, 2021; Ramapriyan et al., 2021) can lead directly to broad and highly productive use of data. Processing levels differentiate data products from raw data to more highly processed and transformed data (Weaver, 2014; Mittaz et al., 2019). Processing level designations also provide important context for data interpretation (Hills et al., 2015). However, no such community agreement exists for active acoustic data. The ambiguity associated with the interoperability and inter-comparability of processed sonar data products has hindered efficient collaboration and integrative use of the rapidly growing data archive across research institutions and agencies.

In this document we present a proposed set of data processing levels for water column data generated by active sonar systems. We first review the history and use of data processing levels in the broader environmental monitoring community, particularly from satellite systems. We then review existing schemes applied to echosounder data. The proposed processing levels are described, including a rationale for the choices made in the context of existing community practices.
