docs/source/background.md, before:

# Background

The increasing deployment of active sonar systems in a wide variety of ocean observing platforms have created unique opportunities for characterizing mid-trophic biological scatterers such as fish and zooplankton in the water column {cite}`benoitbird_2016`. Data generated from these instruments are increasingly recognized for their potential and distinctive contribution to marine ecosystem assessments and resource management, and as a critical component of observing systems for marine life {cite}`benson_2018,estes_2021,satterthwaite_2021,santora_2021,schwing_2023`.

The value of archiving and openly distributing the large volume of data collected by scientific echosounders and similar instruments is now widely recognized {cite}`wall_2016,haris_sounding_2021`. However, maximizing the use of such data entails the use of community data and metadata standards and data catalogs for data discoverability and access {cite}`benson_2018,buck_2019`. In addition, a consistent categorization of the variety of data sets and data products derived from echosounder data will facilitate access and appropriate use of such data.

The decades-long experience from the satellite remote sensing community has shown that a set of robust and well-articulated definitions of "data processing levels" {cite}`parkinson_earth_2006,robinson_2006,weaver_processing_2014,nasa_data_2021,ramapriyan_2021` can lead directly to broad and highly productive use of data. Processing levels differentiate data products from raw data to more highly processed and transformed data. Processing level designations also provide important context for data interpretation {cite}`hills_2015`. However, no such community agreement exists for active acoustic data. The ambiguity associated with the interoperability and inter-comparability of processed sonar data products has hindered efficient collaboration and integrative use of the rapidly growing data archive across research institutions and agencies.

In this document we present a proposed set of data processing levels for water column data generated by active sonar systems. We first review the history and use of data processing levels in the broader environmental monitoring community, particularly from satellite systems. We then review existing schemes applied to echosounder data. The proposed processing levels are described, including a rationale for the choices made in the context of existing community practices.

Commit message:

review background and index pages

docs/source/background.md, after:

# Background

The recent expansion of echosounder deployment on a wide variety of ocean observing platforms have created unique opportunities for characterizing the spatial and temporal distribution of mid-trophic level animals, such as fish and zooplankton, at broad range of scales. Echosounder data are increasingly recognized for their potential and distinctive contribution to marine ecosystem observation and resource assessments and management {cite}`benson_2018,estes_2021,satterthwaite_2021,santora_2021,schwing_2023`.

The value of archiving and openly distributing large volumes of data collected by scientific echosounders and similar instruments is widely recognized {cite}`wall_2016,haris_sounding_2021`. However, maximizing the use of such data entails the use of community data and metadata standards as well as data catalogs for data discoverability and access {cite}`benson_2018,buck_2019`. A consistent categorization of the variety of echosounder data sets and derived data products will further facilitate access and appropriate use of such data.

The decades-long experience from the satellite remote sensing community has shown that a set of robust and well-articulated definitions of "data processing levels" {cite}`parkinson_earth_2006,robinson_2006,weaver_processing_2014,nasa_data_2021,ramapriyan_2021` can lead directly to broad and highly productive use of data. Processing levels differentiate data products from raw data to more highly processed and transformed data. Processing level designations also provide important context for data interpretation {cite}`hills_2015`. However, no such community agreement exists for echosounder data. Improving the interoperability and inter-comparability of processed echosounder data products will likely facilitate efficient collaboration and integrative use of the rapidly growing data archive across research institutions and agencies.

<!-- In this document we present a proposed set of processing levels from raw echosounder data to derived data products. We first review the history and use of data processing levels in the broader environmental monitoring community, particularly from satellite systems. We then describe existing schemes applied to echosounder data, and present the proposed processing levels with rationale of the choices. -->
