# Current status

We are aware of only two efforts that have adopted data processing levels for echosounder data products: ADEON (Atlantic Deepwater Ecosystem Observatory Network {cite}`heaney_adeon_2020`) and IMOS (the Australian Integrated Marine Observing System {cite}`haris_imos_2018,haris_sounding_2021`).

## ADEON
ADEON developed a set of six processing levels (L0-L5) for passive and active acoustics: L0 corresponds to raw, unprocessed data files generated by the instruments; L1 contains calibrated time series data, including calibrated volume backscattering strength (Sv); L2 is the first level of data processed from the calibrated data, such as depth-integrated Sv with noise removal applied; and L3-L5 contain higher-order processing, including signal classifications, interpolated products and synthesis or modeled products. Heaney et al. {cite}`heaney_adeon_2020` use a table that aligns different systems to provide a visual comparison of their processing levels with those from NASA EOS and from the French IFREMER program {cite}`ifremer_processing_2019`. In practice, the ADEON focus for active acoustics was largely on L0-L2. Common data formats (e.g., csv), were used for the resulting products.

## IMOS
The IMOS SOOP-BA NetCDF convention (Ships of Opportunity Bio-Acoustic {cite}`haris_imos_2018,haris_sounding_2021`) focused on derived data products categorized as L2, using the broader IMOS "file_version" processing level categorization for marine data. This categorization also includes L0 (raw data) and L1 (quality controlled data). The IMOS SOOP-BA data are stored in a NetCDF format that is metadata-rich and follows broader ocean and earth science data and metadata standards. The data products include several variables, such as uncorrected and unfiltered Sv, processed Sv (motion correction and filtering, as well as noise removal), metrics derived from Sv, and ancillary oceanographic data. Unmodified raw data files are archived and made available only upon request (Haris, K., pers. comm.).
